.. -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
.. _siena_tutorials.Worksheet03-FirstStepsTowardsProgramming:

===============================
First steps towards programming
===============================

.. MODULEAUTHOR:: Franco Saliola <saliola at gmail.com>

In this worksheet, you will learn to define functions, write for loops,
conditional statements and and continue to learn about lists.

Functions
---------

To define a function in Sage, use the ``def`` command and a colon after the
variable names. For example::

    sage: def is_even(n):
    ....:     return n % 2 == 0

Notice that *body* of the function (the line:  ``return n % 2 == 0`` ) is
indented. The indentation defines the body of the function.

**Exercises:**

#. Define a function called  ``square``  that returns the square of a number::

    sage: # edit here

If statement
------------

Below is an example of an  ``if`` statement::

    sage: if n % 2 == 0:
    ....:     return True
    ....: else:
    ....:     return False

Notice again how the commands in the first block and the second block of the
statement are indented.

The following example defines the  ``factorial_function`` , which takes a
number :math:`n` and returns the product :math:`n(n-1)(n-2)\cdots1`::

    sage: def factorial_function(n):
    ....:     if n == 0:
    ....:         return 1
    ....:     elif n == 1:
    ....:         return 1
    ....:     else:
    ....:         return n*factorial_function(n-1)

**Exercises:**

#. Define a function  ``sign``  that returns the sign of a number::

    sage: # edit here

For loops
---------

The following example uses a for loop to create a list of all the numbers
between 1 and 1000 that are multiples of 3 and 5::

    sage: nums = []
    sage: for i in range(1,1001):
    ....:     if i % 3 == 0 and i % 5 == 0:
    ....:         nums.append(i)
    sage: print nums
    [15, 30, 45, 60, 75, 90, 105, 120, 135, 150, 165, 180, 195, 210, 225, 240, 255, 270, 285, 300, 315, 330, 345, 360, 375, 390, 405, 420, 435, 450, 465, 480, 495, 510, 525, 540, 555, 570, 585, 600, 615, 630, 645, 660, 675, 690, 705, 720, 735, 750, 765, 780, 795, 810, 825, 840, 855, 870, 885, 900, 915, 930, 945, 960, 975, 990]

**Exercises:**

#. Recall that the  *Fibonacci sequence*  is the sequence of numbers that
   begins with :math:`F_0 = 0`, :math:`F_1=1`, and that satisfies the equation
   :math:`F_n = F_{n-1} + F_{n-2}` for all :math:`n\geq2`. Define a function
   that returns a list of the first  ``m``  terms in the Fibonacci sequence::

    sage: # edit here

`Project Euler Problem 2 <http://projecteuler.net/index.php?section=problems&id=2>`_
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Each new term in the Fibonacci sequence is generated by adding the previous two
terms. By starting with 1 and 2, the first 10 terms will be:

.. MATH::
   1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, \ldots

Find the sum of all the even-valued terms in the sequence which do not exceed
four million.

::

    sage: # edit here

Slicing lists
-------------

You can *slice* a list to obtain only part of it. The syntax is
``L[start:stop:step]``.

#. Let  ``L = range(100)``, and try the following  ``L[0:3], L[:3], L[1:],
   L[1:-1], L[::2]``.

   ::

       sage: # edit here

#. Create a list ``L``.

   ::

       sage: # edit here

#. Use a slice to obtain the reversal of  ``L`` .

   ::

       sage: # edit here

#. Revese the list  ``L``  using  ``L.reverse()`` . 

   ::

       sage: # edit here

#. What is the difference between these methods of reversing a list?

   ::

       sage: # edit here

`Project Euler Problem 4 <http://projecteuler.net/index.php?section=problems&id=4>`_
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A palindromic number reads the same both ways. The largest palindrome made from
the product of two 2-digit numbers is :math:`9009 = 91 \times 99`.

Find the largest palindrome made from the product of two 3-digit numbers.

*Hints:*

- ``7%3``  returns the remainder of 7 divided by 3.
- ``7//3``   returns the integer quotient of 7 by 3.

::

    sage: # edit here






